---
layout: blog
title: "Day 2: Notes on Memory"
math: true
footnotes: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

My half-hearted attempts to learn and build things over the last year (or the last five) haven't produced a lot of concrete output. But I have learned a lot about how to learn and how to be productive, some of which I haven't seen written about anywhere else before. That's what the next few posts will be on: memorization, productivity, habit management, and something that I don't have a good word for but is approximately 'virtuosity' or 'zen'.

Here are some realizations about memory and memorization.

<!--more-->

## 1. Vocab Memorization

I've been using [Anki](http://ankisrs.net/) to learn (English) vocabulary for a while now. Anki is one of many types of [Spaced Repetition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition) software, and Spaced Repetition is highly recommended for learning efficiently by, like, everyone. I haven't studied alternatives enough to specifically recommend for or against Anki, but it's working for my purposes.

This came from a stark realization at some point last year: that I was looking up the definitions of words that I *had looked up before* in my life, and that that was very pointless and inefficient. Indeed, I felt that my vocabulary hadn't substantially improved since high school, and all sorts of words that I was vaguely familiar with never became concrete and 'solidified' (or perhaps the word is 'crystallized'?) in my brain, even though I was exposed to them repeatedly.

In case it needs to be said, I think there's a benefit in learning more words over time. Depending on who you hang out with or what you're writing for it might not be useful to you to actually use fancy language -- but it can only help to be able to understand it. And there are many words in this realm between "everyday" and "too obscure to use" that it's socially acceptable to communicate in, and knowing how to use them gives you more expressive power and eloquence.

I resolved to start learning words 'for real': learning their definition, connotation, and learning them in such a way that I could casually use them in writing or speech. I'm now convinced that, if you can say what a word means but can't adeptly use it in a sentence without a lot of thought, you don't really know it. I don't have a better verb for this than the hyphenated monstrosity "actually-learning" -- as opposed to pretend-learning, wherein you look something up and forget it the next day.

I haven't diligently tried to memorize anything in years. It's way harder than I remember, and I've figured out a lot about what does and doesn't work for me. These aren't necessarily obscure ideas, but as with many good realizations they only get internalized when you figure them out for yourself.

**1. Memorization works differently compared to when I was younger.** I don't know how to prove this but I'm quite sure it's true. In high school or so, I'd look up words and they'd stick around in my head without additional effort. Now it's imperative that I build a *framework* around the word, connecting it to other words or its roots or its etymology, to get it to stick.

I don't know if this is due to my brain working differently with age, or becoming 'more full', or if it's a result of being chronically sleep-deprived for the last decade. But it's a marked difference.

**2. To remember a word, build a framework around it.** Etymologies, stories, idiomatic usages, or just good example sentences work great for this. Understanding the full connotation of a word, instead of a simple definition, does also.

The word 'gasconade' (extravagant boasting, or (v) to boast extravagantly) was meaningless without a framework: recording the word and its definition in my brain didn't work at all. But with the etymology, it was easy: it turns out that it refers to the reputedly boastful inhabits of Gascony, in France, and came to be used as an epithet by other parts of the country.

2a. Etymologies are invaluable. When I was a teenager etymologies seemed useless to me, but now I find I need them to learn basically *any* new word.

The root 'aestus' referred to fire/boiling in Latin, but boiling became associated with the tide (since it seems like the boiling of the ocean). Thus, it's hard to forget that estuaries are tidal bodies of water.

2b. Stories behind words are invaluable. The word 'boffin' (a researcher, a person with arcane technical or scientific knowledge) is easy to remember when you know that it came into use in British English during/after WWII as an almost affectionate term for the scientists who helped win the war, though its positive connotation is gradually fading.

2c. Long definitions are easier to remember than short ones. They seem to give more 'hooks' for framework-building. One- or two- word definitions are basically un-rememberable for me.

2d. Vaguely onomatopeiac words are easy to remember. I have no trouble remembering that a 'cosh' is a bludgeon, because it kind of sounds like one -- one syllable, harsh, and blunt.

**3. You can *feel* when a definition won't stick.** There's a sensation of 'emptiness' or 'unengagement' when you read a definition but don't 'learn it' from the reading. It's hard to describe. It's important to 'listen' for this and do extra work to build a framework. 

Don't let yourself 'go through the motions' when studying. If a word is met by a sensation of blankness in your mind, don't keep going. And if your brain feels like mush and no words are sticking, it's best to quit and come back later. 

**4. Words whose definitions don't seem related to their constructions are hard to remember.** I had the hardest time getting 'prevaricate' (to speak or act evasively, to skirt around the truth) to stick, because none of its parts 'pre', 'vari-, or '-ate' seem related to its meaning. This makes it harder to remember than if it was a standalone word not composed of familiar pieces. Since we're stuck with these words, we have to find their frameworks elsewhere.

(Apparently it comes from Latin, via *varus*, 'bowlegged' -> *praevaricari*, 'to straddle' -> idiomatically, 'to act in collusion'. So the etymology is just as useless, except for being slightly intriguing).

**5. There's not really such a thing as 'synonyms'.** Or rather, for some reason I spent twenty-odd years of my life thinking that synonyms were "words that meant the same thing to the point of substitutability", even though that was defied by intuition all the time. Under the slightest inspection it's clear that two words that are synonyms basically *always* have at-least-slightly different connotations -- or if they don't, it's probably because they're not used very often, and if they became more popular they would acquire different connotations anyway.

To remember two words that mean almost the same thing, learn what the difference is. 'Approbation' and 'Approval' are almost identical, except that the former has an 'official' connotation. (It helps, also, to note that 'v's and 'b's are often interchangeable etymologically. I think the difference is that the 'v' version came through (Old) French, but I'm not sure -- and the observation is effective for memory regardless of whether that's true.)

### 2. Disclaimer on Thinking Styles

I'm pretty sure everything above is accurate for *me* and my brain.. And they seem to apply, at least, to my twin brother. But over the years I've been becoming acutely aware of how differently peoples' brains work from each other.

Example: I saw a musical with a friend recently. When we were walking back to the car, she was singing one of the songs from the show. I could, vaguely, follow along. Thirty seconds after we parted ways, I couldn't recall any of the tunes or words to any song in the show. She would still have been able to sing parts of most or all of them.

This finally solidified something I half-knew for years: that my brain doesn't record something - language? music? audio? the same way many others' do. My first recollection of "everyone being able to quote movies except for me" was in, I think, third grade. I've been confused my whole life about how everyone else knows the words to all the vogue pop songs. I figured they spent much more time listening to music than I ever did. Now I know it's not that -- their brains just somehow remember sounds and lyrics and quotes after one or two exposures. Whereas it takes me maybe an hour of concerted effort to learn the words to a song.

I checked with my family over Christmas: my dad and brothers have the same quality, an inability to remember lyrics, and my mom doesn't. (Tough I don't want to claim that this is necessarily nurtured or genetic or anything. A common thread among my family members who can't remember lyrics easily is that we didn't grow up with lots of sung music in our early childhoods either.)

All this to say, it's important to remember that brains vary *wildly* in how they work. It's well-known that people do better with different learning styles; I'm mentioning this to remind you that there are differences that are more fundamental than 'learning style' -- in how we process everything, all the time. So for an individual, it's important to keep looking for what works for you, and anecdotal similarities in how we think are signs that we might benefit from similar techniques.

(Incidentally, I used to/usually think of this quality as a weakness, but it's possible that it's counterbalanced by a knack for mathematical/abstract reasoning, which I think I'm atypically good at.)