---
layout: blog
title: "Digression, on Questioning Math"
math: true
---

In the last few days I worked on a couple long-form posts for another medium: [LessWrong](https://www.lesswrong.com). I imported the first one here for yesterday.

LessWrong is a website centered around posts and discussion on the art of rationality. It was once the hub of a burgeoning 'rationalist community', sustained by a few talented writers. At the time it was the watering hole for some slightly eccentric social groups, and generated lots of real-life meetups and high-quality writing. These days the excitement has mostly died down, and most of the content in the 'rationalist sphere' is scattered to various personal blogs. I don't consider myself a full member of the LessWrong/rational community, but... I moonlight.

This week there was discussion of working to revitalize LessWrong as a community hub, and it seemed like an opportune time to contribute. I think that attempts to revitalize LW have failed in the past because no one has taken up the mantle of writing consistently good content. Most of the posts these days are low-quality or just very uninformed, as are many of the comments. So, I gave it a shot with ["Infinite Summations: A Rationality Litmus Test"](http://lesswrong.com/r/discussion/lw/oht/infinite_summations_a_rationality_litmus_test/). 

The point of that post is to convince you that you can, as a rational person, be confident that there's something *false* about strange identities like $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12}$$, *even if* there's a confident and credentialed video and a dubious proof telling you otherwise -- because knowing a lot of technical math doesn't give them a free pass to override your intuition about tools you already know well, such as "what addition is".

<!--more-->

I'm pretty happy with it, and it seemed well-received in the comments. Though, I've come to realize that LW has a serious problem with not supporting contributions via upvotes or supportive comments. Often many members will chime in to contribute their own (often uninformed/less thought-out) opinions, typo corrections, or just nitpicky criticism, without giving the impression that they're glad you have written anything at all. It can be very dispiriting.

-------------

This was my first time writing long-form for a public audience and actually trying to capture people's attention with it (unlike, say, Reddit and Hacker News comments where you're usually engaged in an argument or discussion already so you don't have to fight for attention). It helps that the topic I discussed is really tantalizing for laypeople due to how unintuitive it is. I don't know that I have enough ideas for other posts that are *nearly* as fascinating.

One new experience while writing that: having to write in an *interesting* enough way to keep a reader engaged. So far on this blog I've been writing without any eye for engagement, just 'reporting' what I've found on a subject. This is probably fine -- it takes a lot less mental effort and willpower, and someone who's interested in what I'm writing about will probably remain engaged for free. But I've got to keep in mind that no one *else* will care about this stuff, and if I want to write anything for a popular audience (to share on link aggregate sites, say), I'll need to adopt the engaging tone instead of the... explicatory? one that I've been using.


### Mathematical Gaslighting

It turns out that $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12}$$ is *so* interesting that almost everyone ignored the point of my post, which was approximately:

> Claiming that $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12}$$ is true without extensive qualification, such as "we're not talking about normal addition" or "that's not a normal equals sign", is so disingenuous that it should be condemned, and that rational laypeople should feel equipped to confidently reject it.

Indeed, better ways to say it are "the analytic continuation of $$1+2+3+\ldots$$ gives $$\frac{-1}{12}$$", or, better yet, $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12} + O(\infty)$$, making it clear that there is more to the result than integers summing to a negative fraction.

The point very much wasn't to explain the summation result again. There are plenty of explanations online, of varying quality. But even in the comments people were writing things like "I know about formal summation techniques and there *are* ways to show that $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{1}{12}$$". No, there are not. They're showing *something else*, and you and everyone else are abusing the notation and then telling the laypeople who don't know how to protest that they're *going crazy* when they think the result is unintuitive. You're [gaslighting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaslighting) people (to possibly abuse the term) into thinking that everyday arithmetic doesn't make sense anymore. 

This seems to me to be a Big Problem with the relationship of academia to society: the inability of the experts to be clear and precise in their thinking is turned around into a tool to convince laypeople that their everyday understanding of the world is broken. This confusing result is confusing because the professionals are being criminally imprecise. That's the real source of the intuitive result. But you can't make a popular video saying "look how foolishly imprecise mathematicians and physicists are being!", so it doesn't come out that way.

It can happen if political theorists have definitions of justice that disagree with everyday ones, or when when literary experts tell you that dense miserable prose is truly artistic and imply that you're missing something if you're not affected by it or prefer something more accessible. Or when you're supposed to appreciate esoteric works in art museums over striking paintings on coffeeshop walls. Or *whatever*.

I suspect we should be rejecting the idea that lofty technical arguments *can* legitimately reveal quotidian reasoning to be incorrect -- because every time it happens it seems like the real problem is abusively conflating the technical idea with the quotidian one. (disclaimer: not totally sure about this statement. Need to think of more examples.)

I think most intelligent people can (eventually) understand any legitimate idea, if they have the patience to do so, and so highly technical ideas should either *not* be allowed to supplant everyday understanding, or they should be able to explained coherently at an accessible, intuitive level. At least I can't remember seeing an idea that has general relevance (as opposed to say, a technical theorem about a technical concept that makes no claims about everyday life) and *can't* be explained in everyday terms, in math or philosophy or anywhere else.

### Addendum

For Day 5 I wrote a second [essay](http://lesswrong.com/r/discussion/lw/oi0/09991_another_rationality_litmus_test/) for LessWrong instead of posting here, again because it seemed like an important time to do so, and because I was motivated by the positive reception to the first one. This time I wrote about the slightly surprising fact that $$0.99\bar{9} = 1$$, and how a rational person could go about processing that fact when they first see it.

This one wasn't as good, because my point was more "hey, if you don't normally do math, maybe you should consider trying when you see unintuitive results", which, while possibly correct, isn't actually that interesting. And because $$0.99\bar{9} = 1$$ isn't nearly as surprising as the first post's central mathematical oddity.

I posted it mostly because I wanted to keep my streak up, and because I felt motivated to write a whole article at the time. I don't regret writing it but I need to probably keep the insight quality higher if I'm going to succeed at reminding LW how enjoyable good posts are.