---
layout: blog
title: "Day 6: Digression, on Questioning Math"
math: true
---

I decided on days 4 and 5, instead of working on blog posts, to work on long-form posts for another medium - [Lesswrong](https://www.lesswrong.com). I think as long as I'm producing writing everyday it should count as meeting my goal.

Lesswrong is a website centered around posts and discussion on the art of rationality. It was once a bustling hub of a burgeoning 'rationalist community', sustained by a few key writers who have since moved on to their own blogs, that caused all sorts of slightly eccentric social groups and real-life meetups and produced lots of high-quality writing. It feels mostly past its prime now, and most of the content in the rationalist sphere is scattered to various personal blogs.

But, there was discussion of working to revitalize it this week, and I thought it was an opportune time to try to contribute. My feeling is that attempts to revitalize LW have failed because no one has taken up the mantle of writing consistently good content (most of the posts these days are low-quality or just very uninformed, as are many of the comments). So, I gave it a shot with ["Infinite Summations: A Rationality Litmus Test"](http://lesswrong.com/r/discussion/lw/oht/infinite_summations_a_rationality_litmus_test/). 

The point of this post was to convince you that you can, as a rational person, be confident that there's something *false* about strange identities like $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12}$$, *even if* there's a confident and credentialed video and a dubious proof telling you otherwise -- because knowing a lot of technical math doesn't give them a free pass to override your intuition about tools you already know well, such as "what addition is".

<!--more-->

I'm pretty happy with it, and it seemed well-received in the comments. Though, I've come to realize that LW has a serious problem with not supporting contributions via upvotes or supportive comments. lots of people will chime in to contribute their own (often uninformed) opinions, typo corrections, or just picky criticism, without giving the impression that they're glad you have written anything at all. It's very dispiriting.

-------------

This was my first time writing long-form for a public audience and actually trying to capture people's attention with it (unlike, say, Reddit and Hacker News comments where you're usually engaged in an argument or discussion already so you don't have to fight for attention). It helps that the topic I discussed is really tantalizing for laypeople due to how unintuitive it is. I don't know that I have enough ideas for other posts that are *nearly* as fascinating.

One new experience while writing that: having to write in an *interesting* enough way to keep a reader engaged. So far on this blog I've been writing without any eye for engagement, just 'reporting' what I've found on a subject. This is probably fine -- it takes a lot less mental effort and willpower, and someone who's interested in what I'm writing about will probably remain engaged for free. But I've got to keep in mind that no one *else* will care about this stuff, and if I want to write anything for a popular audience (to share on link aggregate sites, say), I'll need to adopt the engaging tone instead of the... explicatory? one that I've been using.


### Mathematical Gaslighting

It turns out that $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12}$$ is *so* interesting that almost everyone ignored the point of my post, which was approximately:

> Claiming that $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12}$$ is true without extensive qualification, such as "we're not talking about normal addition" or "that's not a normal equals sign", is so disingenuous that it should be condemned, and that rational laypeople should feel equipped to confidently reject it.

Indeed, better ways to say it are "the analytical continuation of $$1+2+3+\ldots$$ gives $$\frac{-1}{12}$$", or, better yet, $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{-1}{12} + O(\infty)$$, making it clear that there is more to the result than a negative fraction.

My point wasn't to explain the summation result again, though. There are plenty of explanations online of varying quality. But even in the comments people were writing things like ~"I know about formal summation techniques and there *are* ways to show that $$1+2+3+\ldots = \frac{1}{12}$$". No, there are not. They're showing *something else*, and you and everyone else are abusing the notation and then telling the laypeople who don't know how to protest that they're *going crazy* when they think the result is unintuitive. You're [gaslighting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaslighting) people (to possibly abuse the term) into thinking that everyday arithmetic doesn't make sense anymore. 

This seems to me to be a Big Problem with the relationship of academia to society: that the inability of the smart, educated people to be clear and precise in their thinking is turned around into a tool to convince laypeople that their everyday understanding of the world is meaningless. (And yes, this confusing result is confusing because the professionals are being criminally imprecise. That's the real source of the intuitive result. But you can't make a popular video saying "look how foolishly imprecise mathematicians and physicists are being!")

It happens when political theorists have definitions of justice that disagree with everyday ones; it happens when literary experts tell you that dense miserable prose is truly artistic and imply that you're missing something if you're not affected by it or prefer something more accessible. Or when you're supposed to appreciate esoteric gibberish in art museums over emotionally-relevant paintings on coffeeshop walls. Or *whatever*.

I suspect we should be rejecting the idea that lofty technical arguments *can* legitimately reveal quotidian reasoning to be incorrect -- because every time it happens it seems like the real problem is abusively conflating the technical idea with the quotidian one. (disclaimer: I'm not totally sure about this position. Need to think of more examples.)

I think most intelligent people can (eventually) understand any legitimate idea, if they have the patience to do so, and so highly technical ideas should either *not* be allowed to supplant everyday understanding, or they should be able to explained coherently at an accessible, intuitive level. At least I can't remember seeing an idea that has general relevance (as opposed to say, a technical theorem about a technical concept that makes no claims about everyday life) and *can't* be explained in everyday terms, in math or philosophy or anywhere else.

### Addendum

On Day 5 I wrote a second [essay](http://lesswrong.com/r/discussion/lw/oi0/09991_another_rationality_litmus_test/) for Lesswrong instead of posting here, again because it seemed like an important time to do so, and because I was motivated by the positive reception to the first one. This time I wrote about the slightly surprising fact that $$0.99\bar{9} = 1$$, and how a rational person could go about processing that fact when they first see it.

This one wasn't as good, because my point was more "hey, if you don't normally do math, maybe you should consider trying when you see unintuitive results", which, while possibly correct, isn't actually that interesting. And because $$0.99\bar{9} = 1$$ isn't nearly as surprising as the first post's central mathematical oddity.

I posted it mostly because I wanted to keep my streak up, and because I felt motivated to write a whole article at the time. I don't regret writing it but I need to probably keep the insight quality higher if I'm going to succeed at reminded LW how enjoyable discussing good posts is.