---
layout: blog
title: "The Most Useful Bit of Physics"
footnotes: true
math: true
aside: true
tags: notes
---

Unsurprisingly I have had no real use for my physics undergraduate degree in adult life except for, like, pretending to know stuff on this blog. 

Yet there is a vague intuition that studying physics gives you something, a sort of mathematical intuition, that _everyone_ ought to acquire from their education, and that almost everyone isn't getting (not even the math majors). And it seems like that core skill ought to not require studying Lagrangians or spinors or whatever to understand, and that we should figure out how to directly teach it to everyone so that it might become universal in public discourse. And we definitely shouldn't wait to impart it only in the later years of college, either, if it's so useful.

<!--more-->

The essential skill is basically "estimation", except if you call it that and try to put it into schools, you end up with stupid word problems written by people who think "estimation" means "rounding". So perhaps the more useful skill is "estimation with Taylor Series", aka "first-order approximations".

The classic example is rounding $$\frac{1}{1-x} \approx 1 + x$$ for tiny $$x \ll 1$$. But I wonder if you need to know about Taylor series at all to do it. I could imagine introducing the small-$$x$$ approximations to each standard function in a pre-calculus class and having people memorize and apply them to problems without having any idea what a derivative is:

$$\begin{aligned}
\frac{1}{1-x} &\approx 1 + x \\
\sqrt{1 + x} &\approx 1 + \frac{1}{2} x \\
e^{x} &\approx 1 + x \\
\ln(1 + x) &\approx x \\
\sin(x) &\approx x \\
\cos(x) &\approx 1 \text{ (or } 1-\frac{x^2}{2} \text{) }
\end{aligned}$$


They would certainly be more useful than trig identities are.

Not that most people ever run into a single equation in their lives where they could apply these -- but maybe they would if equations were more useful to them. 

In particular it's basically pointless putting a non-trivial equation into a book or news article because, well, people's eyes glaze over, but also because most people have no skill at deriving intuition from equations. But if you have some facility with this type of approximation, you can go: "what does this equation do for tiny $$x$$? what about for giant $$x$$? Huh, okay." like physicists do every day, and maybe actually get something out of it.

Even if you never apply approximation to an equation after you finish school, it still confers a sort of intuition for "how functional relationships work" that feels useful to me all the time. There's no reason that skill needs to be trained only in a couple academic fields. I sure wish some non-mathematical professionals, such as... doctors?... had to have it.

------

... of course mathematical intuition is something that needs to be all over curricula in general, ideally replacing most of the memorized algorithms that we teach today. Also we should focus on mental math, especially in young students, instead of paper algorithms, and stop using graphing calculators entirely. 

"You'll always have a computer to do this, so why do it by hand", they said. Is that so? I bet most people wouldn't know where to go to graph a function as an adult to save their lives, unless they still have their TI-83 laying around. (Easiest way is [Google](https://www.google.com/search?q=y+%3D+5x+%2B+3), by the way.)

I don't know where people got the idea that the point of education is to learn _facts_. The point should be to make you _smart_. Then you can know all the facts you want. The school of facts just makes you "dumb, but full of facts". Harrumph.

...

-----

I guess it's on me to demonstrate that Taylor approximation is "generally useful", and I don't have a great example in mind to demonstrate that. But once you get in the habit of thinking in (first-)order-approximations you kinda keep doing that the rest of your life, and it feels good. You say things like "to first order, stopping to fix my phone should have no effect on how long this road trip takes" ("... unless there's an unknown 'interaction term', like maybe once my phone is working it's more fun to get distracted singing along to music so on average I drive slower...", and other examples of totally unnecessary but actually pretty valid physics jargon.)

--------

Incidentally, this half-baked thought came from the following rabbit hole that led to a pleasing example of such an approximation:

1. [This blog post](https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2022/12/neutrino_dark_matter.html) about heavy sterile right-handed neutrinos as a dark matter candidate in a new paper, which linked to
2. The Wikipedia article on [The See-saw Mechanism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seesaw_mechanism), which is the mathematical phenomenon which might explain why there would be a very-heavy neutrino for each of the known very-light ones, and which has a wonderful name.

The mechanism is that a matrix of the form $$\begin{pmatrix} 0 & M \\ M & B \end{pmatrix}$$ has eigenvalues

$$\lambda_{\pm} = \frac{B \pm \sqrt{B^2 + 4 M^2}}{2}$$

Which have $$\lambda_+ \times \lambda_- = -M^2$$, aka, if one goes up, the other goes down. Hence the "see-saw".

In particular, since $$\sqrt{B^2 + 4 M^2} = B \sqrt{1 + \frac{4M^2}{B^2}}$$, if $$B \gg M$$ then 

$$\frac{4 M^2}{B^2} \ll 1$$

and so

$$\begin{aligned}
\frac{B \pm B \sqrt{1 + \frac{4 M^2}{B^2}}}{2} 
&\approx \frac{B \pm B(1 + \frac{1}{2} \frac{4 M^2}{B^2})}{2}\\
&= \frac{B \pm (B + \frac{2M^2}{B})}{2}
\end{aligned}$$

Which gives

$$\begin{aligned}\lambda_+ &\approx B + \frac{M^2}{B} \approx B \\
\lambda_- &\approx - \frac{M^2}{B}\end{aligned}$$


And (read the article or whatever) these $$\lambda$$ end up related to the masses of the neutrinos.

This particular calculation is a bit more complex than anything you'd probably ask a high-schooler to do. But there's really nothing especially difficult about it. It's just not something we show anybody else how to do. What's up with that?
