---
layout: blog
title: "Investigations on n-Spheres"
math: true
aside: true
footnotes: true
tag: math
---

The Wikipedia articles [$$n$$-sphere](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-sphere) and [Volume of an $$n$$-ball](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume_of_an_n-ball) and [Volume of a unit sphere](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_sphere#Volume_and_area) are not great references on the basic formulae because all the information is spread out among them in un-useful ways. I went to write my own reference... but then I got annoyed by the shape of the formulae themselves, with their strange Gamma functions and unintuitive $$\sqrt{\pi}$$ factors, so I starting trying to refactor them. It didn't all fall into place, unfortunately, but there were some discoveries that I found interesting (which are probably out there in the literature, or not, I don't know). I thought I'd post it anyway because I still feel like there's something here that I'm grasping around for and I'd like to save the progress I made.

(After posting this I made some edits and decided to split it in two, so a lot of the stuff on factorials and their interpretation is now in the sequel, [Factorials Integrals and and ù]({% post_url 2025-05-02-factorials %}).)



<!--more-->

----------

# 1. Measures of Spheres

Here are the volumes and surface areas of $$n$$-spheres $$S^n$$ for the first few $$n$$, as a function of the radius $$r$$ (which I will sometimes omit if it's not useful, later on):

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_0 &= 2 & V_1 &= 2r \\
S_1 &= 2 \pi r & V_2 &= \pi r^2 \\ 
S_2 &= 4 \pi r^2 & V_3 &= \frac{4}{3} \pi r^3 \\ 
S_3 &= 2 \pi^2 r^3 & V_4 &= \frac{1}{2} \pi^2 r^4 \\
S_4 &= \frac{8}{3} \pi^2 r^4 & V_5 &= \frac{8}{15} \pi^2 r^5 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Here $$S_{n}$$ is a surface area of the $$n$$-sphere of radius $$r$$ (also called $$S^n$$, with a superscript) and $$V_n$$ is the volume of the $$n$$-ball $$B^n$$ which is the interior of $$S_{n-1}$$.I don't really care for the "sphere" vs "ball" distinction; I like to just say they're the area and volume of the same sphere. So most of the time I will not use the word ball.

$$S^0$$ is a pair of $$0$$-dimensional points, since there are two points on a line a distance $$r$$ from a single point, with surface "area" $$S_0 = 2$$, and its volume is $$V_1 = 2r$$ since it is a line segment of length $$2r$$. $$S^1$$ is a circle with surface area $$S_1 = 2\pi r$$ and volume $$V_2$$.  The numbers refer to the dimensionality of the object, which is why they're off-by-one for the surface areas vs. volumes: the two-dimensional disc has a one-dimensional boundary, etc. I've always found this a bit weird and confusing but there you go. So $$S^2(r)$$ refers to a two-dimensional sphere, whose surface area is $$S_2(r) = 4 \pi r^2$$ and whose volume is $$V_3(r) = \frac{4}{3} \pi r^3$$.

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/spheres.png" width="250px" %}

Wikipedia also talks about a $$V_0$$, a single point, which would be the interior of a $$(-1)$$-sphere, whatever that means. That seems dumb: there are no points in a $$0$$-dimensional space that are a distance $$r$$ from anything. One argument to keep it around, maybe, is that it does seem to respect the same recurrence relation as the others. Maybe it is kinda implying that $$N$$-spheres are products of smaller-dimensional spheres, and, as with $$0!=1,$$ the products start at $$1$$? I dunno.[^point]

[^point]: Another argument for including it: the intersection of the sphere $$S^2$$ with a plane is a copy of $$S^1$$ the intersection of $$S^1$$ with a line is a copy of $$S^0$$. I suppose the intersection of $$S^0$$ with a point (or a line, for that matter) is a copy of $$S^{-1}$$?

Here's the general form of the areas and volumes, as written on Wikipedia:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_{n-1} &= \frac{2 \pi^{n/2}}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2})} r^{n-1} & V_n &=  \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2} + 1)} r^n \\
\end{aligned}
$$


I have trouble thinking in terms of $$\Gamma$$ functions so here they are written in terms of $$n! = \Gamma(n+1)$$; we'll just let the factorial be defined on non-integers in the same way that $$\Gamma$$ is:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_{n-1} &= \frac{2 \pi^{n/2}}{(\frac{n}{2}-1)!} r^{n-1} & V_n &=  \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{(\frac{n}{2})!} r^n \\
\end{aligned}
$$

And even that for is a bit misleading, though. The factorials should really be thought of as having the same argument, and there's just an extra factor of $$n$$ canceling it out in the $$S_{n-1}$$ formula.

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_{n-1} &= n \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{(\frac{n}{2})!} r^{n-1} & V_n &=  \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{(\frac{n}{2})!} r^n \\
\end{aligned}
$$

That's better. The factor of $$n$$ is simplest because it just reflects the fact that $$\p_r V_n(r) = S_{n-1}$$, because the boundary of a ball is the derivative of its volume with respect to radius (as it has to be). So $$V_n(r) = V_n r^n$$ then $$S_{n-1}(r) = \p_r V_n(r) = n V_n r^{n-1}$$.

But there's something annoying about these formulas. The main problem is how they _appear_ to have half-integer powers of $$\pi$$ for odd $$n$$, but they actually don't, because the half-integer factorial _also_ has a factor of $$\sqrt{\pi}$$, eg $$(\frac{1}{2})! = \frac{\sqrt{\pi}}{2}$$, and the two cancel out.[^wiki] The other nuisance is that they just don't see obvious at all: _why_ are these the areas/volumes of $$n$$-spheres? Surely there is a more intuitive form?

[^wiki]: At the moment there's a comment in the Wikipedia article about it---that was me, I added that as I was writing this.

There are also some recurrence relationships between the $$S$$ and $$V$$ formulas. The easy one is 

$$S_{n-1}(r) = \p V_n(r)/\p r$$

Which is obvious (and true for any figure, for a suitable definition of "radius"). But then there's also stuff like

$$S_{n+1}(r) \? (2 \pi r) V_n(r)$$

Which I don't find especally helpful. What am I supposed to make of that? A sphere is the product of a circle and a line segment? I don't understand why and I can't really visualize what it means. Well: apparently it's because e.g. the sphere's surface area is the same as that of a (uncapped) cylinder of height $$2 r$$ and radius $$r$$ ($$2 \pi r \times 2r = 4 \pi r^2$$). But it's very hard to see intuitively why that should be the case, or why it would generalize.[^height]

[^height]: This corresponds to the fact that _per unit height_ a sphere's surface area is constant, so there really is one $$2\pi r$$'s sphere worth of area per $$2r$$ worth of diameter.

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/spheres-2.png" width="350px" %}

Here's a chart of various relations. I've also walked it into the negatives a bit because that's kinda fun to think about, although I won't be looking into that here...

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/nsphere.png" width="500px" %}

There are other recurrence-like relationships that deserve explanation but which I don't think I understand still. For instance, why is $$S_2(r) = 4 V_1(r)$$ intuitively? How do you cover a sphere with four circles of the same radius? I have no idea. There is a [3b1b video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GNcFjFmqEc8) about that particular identity, but I don't feel satisfied with the explanation even after watching it: it is the sort of thing you have to show, not the sort of thing you see; none of the explanations make it _obvious_. I would like to have a way of seeing this relationship as completely natural, but that seems very hard to find. Whatever it is, it also has to explain why $$S_3$$ and $$V_3$$ differ by a factor proportional to $$\pi$$ while $$S_2$$ and $$V_2$$ do not, and right now I can't even imagine a kind of argument that _could_ explain that.

To make more sense of all this I'm just going to play around with formulas until something pops out.


------------

# 2. Derivations

Here's a lot of work to derive the formulas for $$S_n$$ and $$V_n$$ in various ways.

The most straightforward way is to compute a big integral: to find the area/volume of an $$n$$_sphere, integrate over its surface/interior. This is fairly straightforward, if tedious.

Each $$n$$-sphere is parameterizable by one angle $$\theta \in (0, 2\pi)$$ and then $$n-1$$ angles $$\phi_i \in (0, \pi)$$, plus a $$r \in (0, R)$$ if you want to get the volume of the interior (see [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-sphere#Spherical_coordinates)). Basically the first $$(0, 2\pi)$$ range is for the initial circle (picture the equator of a sphere), and then you repeatedly add polar angles akin to a sphere's $$\phi \in (0, \pi)$$ which adds up a bunch of circles of varying radii. Then the formulas are what you get when you integrate over the whole surface, like 

$$S_2(r) = \int_0^{2 \pi} \int_0^{\pi} r^2 \sin (\phi) \d \phi \d \theta  = 4\pi r^2$$

Higher dimensions have more and more copies of $$\sin^k (\phi_i)$$ on each successive angular variable, and thankfully, the big multivariable integral splits into a product into a product of single-variable integrals because none of the variables area shared. For instance

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_3(r) &=\int_0^\pi \int_0^\pi  \int_0^{2\pi}  r^3 \sin^2 (\phi_2) \sin( \phi_1) \d \phi_1 \d \phi_2 \d \theta \\
&=   \big[ \int_0^\pi r \sin^2 (\phi_2) \d \phi_2 \big] \big[ \int_0^\pi r \sin (\phi_1) \ d \phi_1 \big] \big[ \int_0^{2\pi} r \d \theta \big] \\
&= [\frac{\pi}{2} r] [2 r] [2 \pi r] \\
&= 2 \pi^2 r^3
\end{aligned}
$$

and when you work out the general case you get the formulas for $$S_n$$ (and then $$V_n$$ if you integrate over $$r$$ as well.)

In particular, the source of the "every other term has a factor of $$\pi$$" phenomenon is that $$\int_0^{\pi/2} \sin^k (\theta) d \theta$$ gives a factor of $$\pi$$ for even $$k$$ and not for odd. The reason can be seen by inspecting  $$\sin^2 \theta = \frac{1}{2}(1 - \cos 2 \theta)$$ while $$\sin^3 \theta = \sin \theta (1 - \cos^2 \theta) = \p_\theta (-\cos \theta + \frac{1}{3} \cos^3 \theta)$$, so the bare $$1$$ on the even sine powers becomes a factor of $$\pi$$.

This all assumes you already know the area element for the surface, which I skipped above. Coming up with it is a bit annoying if you only know the standard multivariable approach, with a big Jacobian determinant (hate that name) of the parameterization. A better way to think about it is this:

First consider computing $$S_1 (r)$$. The circumference of a circle is given by integrating its arc length, which is a one-dimensional curve subject to the condition that $$x^2 + y^2 = r^2$$, that is, if $$x = r \cos \theta$$, then $$y = \sqrt{r^2 - x^2} = r \sin \theta$$. So we add up $$\| (dx, dy) \| = \| (r \cos \theta, r \sin \theta) \| = r \d \theta$$ over the whole thing:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_1(r) &= \int_{S_1(r)}  \| dS_1(r) \| \\
&= \int_{x^2 + y^2 = r^2} \| (dx, dy) \| \\
&= \int_{x^2 + y^2 = r^2} \sqrt{dx^2 + dy^2} \\
&= \int_{\theta = 0}^{2 \pi} \sqrt{(-r \sin (\theta) \d\theta )^2 + (r \cos (\theta) \d \theta)^2} \\
&= \int_0^{2\pi} r \d \theta \\
&= 2 \pi r
\end{aligned}
$$

To compute $$S_2(r)$$, which is the level set of $$x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = r^2$$, we can parse it as integrating a "circle" as well: it's the solutions to the constraint

$$\rho^2 + z^2 = r^2$$

Where $$\rho = \sqrt{r^2 - z^2}$$ is the radius of the circle at height $$z$$. So the contribution to the area at each time is the same circular length element, times the circumference $$S_1(\rho)$$ of this circle. But we can parameterize these variables by another angle $$\phi \in (0, \pi)$$: $$z = -r \cos \phi$$ for $$\phi \in (0, \pi)$$ and then $$\rho = r \sin \phi$$:

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/area.png" width="450px" %}

Each area contribution is $$S_1(r \sin \phi) \times r \d \phi$$ for each differential $$d \phi$$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_2(r) &= \int_0^\pi S_1(r \sin \phi) r \d \phi \\
&= \int_0^\pi (2 \pi r \sin \phi) r \d \phi \\
&= 4 \pi r^2
\end{aligned}
$$


The nice thing about looking at it this way is that it's clear how that it generalizes: each sphere $$S_n(r)$$ is given by

$$S_n(r) = \int_0^\pi S_{n - 1}(r \sin \phi_n) r \d \phi_N$$

And since the radial dependence of $$S_{N-1}$$ is $$r^{n-1}$$, we can factor out everything but the sine:

$$S_n(r) = S_{n - 1} r^n \int_0^\pi \sin^{n-1} \phi_{n}\d \phi_n$$

Which gives a recurrence when we start from the base case of $$S_0(r) = 2$$. IMO this is the simplest way of thinking of how the recurrence works and why each term is the integral of a higher power of $$\sin \phi$$.

In light of this it is clear that the fact that the first angle has a different range, $$\theta \in (0, 2\pi)$$, is just a fluke. To make the pattern hold, it should really be thought of as being multiplied by $$S_0 = 2$$ at each point.

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_1(r) &= \int_0^\pi S_0(r \sin \theta) \times (r \d \phi) \\
&= \int_0^\pi 2 r \d \phi \\
&= 2 \pi r
\end{aligned}
$$

That is: the circle $$S^1(r)$$'s interior is the sum of the lengths of horizontal chords of length $$\rho = 2 r \sin \theta$$, which are each copies of $$S_0(r)$$, and its surface area is the sum of the surface "areas" of those. (Of course, you could surely modify the other integrals to be in $$(0, 2\pi)$$ as well, with appropriate factors of $$2^{-n}$$. But this seems more elegant to me).

Similarly, for volume: the volume $$V_n$$ is given by the integral of $$V_{n-1}$$, but now the integrand is $$dz = R \sin \phi_n \d \phi_n$$. For $$n = 1$$, where we'll go ahead and parameterize the circle with $$\phi \in (0, \pi)$$ (and note, there's a negative sign because this integrates $$dz$$ starting from the top of the circle instead of the bottom):

$$
\begin{aligned}
V_2(r) &= \int_{-r}^r V_1(\sqrt{r^2 - z^2}) \d z \\
&= \int_{0}^{\pi} V_1(r \sin \phi) \d (-r \cos \phi) \\
&= \int_0^\pi (2 r \sin \phi) (r \sin \phi \d \phi) \\
&= 2 r^2 \int_0^\pi \sin^2 (\phi) \d \phi \\
&= 2 r^2 \int_0^\pi (\frac{1}{2} - \frac{1}{2} \cos 2 \phi) \d \phi \\
&= 2 r^2 (\frac{1}{2} \phi - \frac{1}{4} \sin 2 \phi) \big|_0^\pi \\
&= \pi r^2
\end{aligned}
$$

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/area-2.png" width="350px" %}

Note that there are _two_ more $$\sin \phi$$s in the integral compared to the $$S_1$$ integral. One comes from the fact that we used the volume of $$S_0(r \sin \phi)$$. The other is from the integrand being $$dz = r \sin (\phi) \d \phi$$ instead of just $$r \d \phi$$. This may be interpreted as being produced by a wedge product: we could still integrate in $$r \d \phi$$, but since we are computing an area, we need to use $$V_0(r \sin \phi) \^ r \d \phi$$, and that interacts only with the orthogonal component, which is $$dz = r \sin \phi \d \phi$$.

And in general:[^wallis]

[^wallis]: Incidentally, each $$\int_0^\pi \sin^n \phi \d \phi = \sqrt{\pi} \frac{(n/2-1/2)!}{(n/2)!}$$ term gives the ratio $$V_n/V_{n-1}$$ (these are apparently known as [Wallis' Integrals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wallis'_integrals)).


$$
\begin{aligned}
V_n(r) &= \int_{-r}^r V_{n-1}(\sqrt{r^2 - z^2}) \d z \\
&=\int_{\pi}^0 V_{n-1}(r \sin \phi_n) \d (r \cos \phi_n) \\
&=\int_0^\pi V_{n-1}(r \sin \phi_n) \times (r \sin (\phi_n) \d \phi_n) \\
&= V_{n-1} r^n \int_0^\pi \sin^{n} (\phi_n) \d \phi_n \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Once again, the extra factor of $$\sin \phi_n$$ shows up because since we are computing a volume we need to multiply the area of the $$S^{n-1}$$ circle by the _orthogonal_ part of $$r \d \phi_n$$, which is $$dz$$.

$$V_n(r) = \int_0^\pi V_{n-1}(r \sin \phi_n) \^ r \d \phi = \int_0^\pi V_{n-1}(r \sin \phi_n) dz$$

-----

# 3. Polyspherical Integrals

In fact, this process can be generalized quite a bit, into what I would call "polyspherical integrals", since it's related to something apparently called [polyspherical coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-sphere#Polyspherical_coordinates)---although I think my version makes a lot more sense than what's on there.

What's really going on when we compute $$V_n$$ from $$V_{n-1}$$ is that, for every element on the line $$z \in (-r, r)$$, we are accumulating a copy of $$V_{n-1}$$. But $$(-r, r)$$ is itself a copy of $$V_1$$. At each point so the integral really has the form

$$V_n(r) = \int_0^{\pi/2} V_{n-1}(r \sin \phi_n) d V_1(z)$$

This can be done with more than just $$n = (n-1) \oplus (1)$$. In fact an $$n = p + q$$ sphere can be seen as a sort-of product of a $$p$$-sphere and a $$q$$-sphere, as follows:

Consider the constraint equation for $$S^{p+q}$$

$$\underbrace{x^2_1 + x^2_2 + x_p^2}_{p} + \ldots \underbrace{x^2_{p+1} + x^2_{p+2} + \ldots x^2_{p+q}}_{q} = r^2$$

This can be seen as describing two spheres whose radii obey $$r_p^2 + r_q^2 = r^2$$:

$$\| \b{x}_p \|^2 + \| \b{x}\|_q^2 = r_p^2 + r_q^2 = r^2$$

To compute $$V_{p+q}$$, then, we can add up: $$V_q(r) = \int_0^r \p_{r_q} V_q(r_q) \d r_q = \int_0^r dV_q(r_q)$$ describes the volume of $$V_q$$, and then for each radius $$r_q$$, there is dual radius $$r_p = \sqrt{r^2 - r_q^2}$$ which contributes a factor of $$V_p(r_p)$$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
V_{p+q} &= \int_0^{r} V_{p}(r_p) dV_q(r_q) \\
&= \int_0^r V_p(\sqrt{r^2 - r_q^2}) S_{q-1}(r_q) dr_q \\
&= \int_0^{\pi/2} V_p(r \sin \phi) S_{q-1}(r \cos \phi) r \sin \phi \d \phi
\end{aligned}
$$

For example: a sphere's volume $$V_3$$ may be computed $$p=2, q=1$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
V_3(r) &= \int_0^{r_q} V_2(r_p) dV_1(r_q) \\
&= \int_0^{\pi/2} [\pi r^2 \sin^2 \phi] d[- 2 r \cos \phi] \\
&= 2 \pi r^3 \int_0^{\pi/2} \sin^3 \phi \d \phi \\
&= 2 \pi r^3 [- \cos \phi + \frac{1}{3} \cos^3 \phi]\big|_0^{\pi/2} \\
&= \frac{4}{3} \pi r^3 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Which corresponds to summing up a circle for each value of $$z = r_q$$, as above. Note, I've changed the integration bounds to $$(0, \pi/2)$$ because now we're integrating over each possible radius of $$V_1(r_q)$$, and at each radius there is a pair of points with volume $$S_0(r_q) = 2$$.

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/area-3.png" width="500px" %}

_Or_ it can be created with $$p=1, q=2$$, which is a $$2r_p$$-length line segment times each ring of a circle with radius $$r_q$$:

$$\begin{aligned}
V_3(r) &= \int_0^{r} V_1(r_q) dV_2 (r_p) \\
&= \int_0^{\pi/2} [2 r \sin \phi] d [\pi r^2 \cos^2 \phi] \\
&= 4 \pi r^3 \int_0^{\pi/2} (\sin \phi) (-\cos \phi \sin \phi) \d \phi \\
&= 4 \pi r^3 [-\frac{1}{3} \sin^3 \phi] \big|_0^{\pi/2} \\
&= \frac{4}{3} \pi r^3
\end{aligned}
$$

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/area-4.png" width="500px" %}

The general case, then, is as follows, which I will work out explicitly to make sure I am not full of shit:

$$
\begin{aligned}
V_{p+q}(r) &= \int_0^{r_q} V_p(r_q) dV_q(r_p) \\
&= \int_0^{\pi/2}  \frac{\pi^{p/2} (r \sin \phi)^{p} }{(\frac{p}{2})!}d \big[ \frac{\pi^{q/2} (r \cos \phi)^{q} }{(\frac{q}{2})!} \big] \\
&= \frac{\pi^{(p+q)/2} }{(\frac{p}{2})! (\frac{q}{2}-1)!}r^{p+q} \times 2 \int_0^{\pi/2} \sin^p \phi \cos^{q-1} \phi \sin \phi \d \phi
\end{aligned}
$$

We could hack that out manually, but it's easier to defer to the Wikipedia for [beta functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beta_function) here. With $$z_1 = \frac{p}{2}+1$$ and $$z_2 = \frac{q}{2}$$ we get

$$
\begin{aligned}
2 \int_0^{\pi/2} \sin^p \phi \cos^{q-1} \phi \sin \phi \d \phi &= 2 \int_0^{\pi/2} \sin^{2z_1-1} \phi \cos^{2z_2-1} \d \phi \\ 
&= \beta(z_1, z_2) \\
&= \frac{\Gamma(z_1) \Gamma(z_2)}{\Gamma(z_1 + z_2)} \\
&= \frac{(\frac{p}{2})! (\frac{q}{2}-1)!}{(\frac{p+q}{2})!} \\
V_{p+q}(r) &=\frac{\pi^{(p+q)/2} }{(\frac{p}{2})! (\frac{q}{2}-1)!}r^{p+q} \big[ \frac{(\frac{p}{2})! (\frac{q}{2}-1)!}{(\frac{p+q}{2})!}  \big] \\
&= \frac{\pi^{(p+q)/2} }{(\frac{p+q}{2})!} r^{p+q}
\end{aligned}
$$

As expected.

The equivalent integral for surface area is given by $$\p_r$$ times this, which is a mess, or it's just given the integral of _both_ surfaces areas times $$r d \phi$$, via a similar $$\beta(p/2, q/2)$$ argument:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_{p+q-1}(r) &= \int_0^r S_{p-1}(r_p) S_{q-1}(r_q) r \d \phi \\ 
&= \int_0^{\pi/2} S_{p-1}(r \sin \phi) S_{q-1}(r \cos \phi) r \d \phi \\
&= \frac{2 \pi^{(p+q)/2}}{(\frac{p+q}{2}-1)!} r^{p+q-1}
\end{aligned}
$$

Which of course could also be written

$$\p_r V_{p+q} = \int_0^r \p_{r_p} V_{p}(r_p) \p_{r_q} V_q(r_q) r \d \phi$$

---------

I find

$$
\begin{aligned}
V_{p+q} &= \int_0^{r} V_p(r_p) dV_q(r_q) \\
\end{aligned}
$$

and to a lesser extent

$$ S_{p+q-1} = \int_0^r S_{p-1}(r_p) S_{q-1}(r_q) r d \phi $$

To be the most agreeable interpretations so far. They at least, in a sense, construct larger spheres out of smaller ones in a way that makes the recurrences make a bit of sense. The sense in which $$S^3 = S^2 \times S^1$$, for instance, is an integral of this sort. These integrals may also be seen as a sort of convolution: since $$\sin \phi = \cos (\frac{\pi}{2}-\phi)$$, it effectively looks like an integral $$\int_0^{\pi/2} f(\pi/2-\phi) g(\phi) \d \phi \? f(\phi) \ast g(\phi)$$. Maybe that's the sense in which they are something like "multiplication"? (And I suppose it would be then become some sort of literal multiplication in some kind of frequency space?)

One other thought I had in the middle of this: I can _sorta_ see why this leads to a new factor of $$\pi$$ for only even $$n$$. Consider something like $$w^2 + x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = r^2$$. When we go to integrate the volume of this, the integral can be factored as two convolved circles, each of which has a factor of $$\pi$$, meaning the volume _ought_ in some sense to have a factor of $$\pi^2$$. A sphere times a line segment then might get $$\pi^2$$ because it can be written as a circle times a circle. But a circle times a line segment only has one factor of $$\pi$$ no matter how you split it up. Basically, it takes a pair of dimensions to produce each $$\pi$$, so for every pair of dimensions you get another factor.

Anyway. Let's move on. I want to look more closely at where the factorials come from.

------

# 4. Spherical Tetrahedrons

Another direction of investigation is to compare $$n$$-spheres to $$n$$-tetrahedrons.

Recall the relationship between $$S_{n-1}$$ and $$V_n$$:

$$V_n(r) = \frac{r}{n} S_{n-1}(r)$$

This factor of $$n$$ is not specific to spheres; it shows up for any formula that's proportional to $$r^n$$. For example it is also there in triangles/tetrahedrons/their $$n$$-dimensional generalization, $$n$$-simplexes. If the base of an $$n$$-simplex $$P = (p_0 p_1 \ldots p_n)$$ is an $$(n-1)$$-simplex with area $$A$$ and the "height" $$h$$ is the distance from $$B$$ to the final point, then 

$$\vol(P) = \frac{1}{n} h B$$

Which is the $$n$$-dimensional analogue of a triangle's $$A = \frac{1}{2} \text{base} \times \text{height}$$. For instance a tetrahedron has volume $$V = \frac{1}{3} B h$$.

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/tetrahedron.png" width="200px" %}

More generally, if 

$$A = \frac{1}{(n-1)!} (p_0 \^ p_1 \^ \ldots \^ p_{n-1})$$

is the "area" (that is, $$(n-1)$$-volume) of the base as a multivector, then

$$\vol(P) = A \^ \frac{1}{n} p_n = \frac{1}{n!} [p_0 \^ p_1 \^ \ldots p_{n-1} \^ p_n]$$

The height $$h$$ happens to be the orthogonal component of $$p_n$$ off of $$A$$, which is why the formula factors that way if you already know it. 

In the case of a tetrahedron, the volume can be written in terms of the base $$a$$ and height $$b$$ of one of its faces, times the height $$c$$ from that face:

$$V = \frac{1}{3} (\frac{1}{2} ab) c = \frac{1}{3!} abc$$ 

Which is where the factorial comes from: you can keep chopping off one point at a time, picking up factor of $$1/n \times 1/(n-1) \times \ldots = 1/n!$$.


A cone has a similar formula. For a three-dimensional cone with flat base the volume is still $$V = \frac{1}{3} A h$$. This may be seen by imagining it to be created out of an infinite number of tiny tetrahedrons or any of various other arguments. One is: both tetrahedrons and cones have the property that they are self-similar as you move along the $$h$$ axis. If you double the height $$h \ra 2h$$, each dimension of the base also doubles, giving $$ B \ra 2^2 B$$. So, as a function of height, $$B(h) = B h^2$$. The volume, then, is $$V = \int B(h) \d h = \int B h^2 \d h = \frac{1}{3} B(h) h^3 = \frac{1}{3} B h$$. The self-similarity along $$h$$ fixes the $$h$$-dependence of the volume to be $$\frac{1}{3} h$$ (or $$1/n$$ in general).

Now consider a different kind of cone: a slice of a sphere, which has a rounded base instead of a flat one (a [spherical cap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_sector)). Now every point on the base is the same distance $$r$$ from the vertex. The area of the face can be thought of as being a fraction of the surface of a sphere with the same radius. If the fraction is $$k$$, then the area of the base is $$k (4 \pi r^2) = \Omega r^2$$, where $$\Omega = 4\pi k$$ is the [solid angle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid_angle) at the vertex. Just as a one-dimensional angle $$\theta \in (0, 2\pi)$$ measures the amount of circumference of a unit circle swept out between two directions, a solid angle is the portion of the area of a unit sphere swept out by some volume. Hence $$\Omega$$ takes values $$\in (0, 4\pi)$$, since $$4\pi$$ is the surface area of a unit sphere (with units of "steradians"), and the area of the base of the curved cone of radius $$r$$ and solid angle $$\Omega$$ is 

$$A = \frac{\Omega}{4\pi} (4 \pi r^2) = \Omega r^2$$

The volume is the same fraction of the sphere's overall volume:

$$V = \frac{\Omega}{4 \pi} V_3(r) = \frac{\Omega}{4\pi} (\frac{4}{3} \pi r^3) = \frac{1}{3} \Omega r^3 = \frac{1}{3} A r$$

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/cones.png" width="350px" %}

Which once again is one-third of the area of the base, times the height, exactly the same as the flat cone. It's for the same reason as before: the curved cone is still self-similar along its axis, hence has the same radial/"height" dependence. This is analogous to how in two dimensions the area of an arc of a circle with angle $$\theta$$ is given by $$\int_0^{\theta} \int_0^r r \d r \d \theta = \frac{1}{2} \theta r^2$$ (see [my other post]({% post_url 2025-03-21-angles %}) on angles for more on this). An arc of a circle is a sort of triangle, and a spherical cone is a sort of circular pyramid? And a sphere is a cone with angle $$\Omega = 4 \pi$$.

A cone is not, however, really the circular equivalent of a tetrahedron. That would be something like this:

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/cone-2.png" width="250px" %}

Since it needs to be a fraction of a solid angle and then have its base be a fraction of a _regular_ angle as well. Otherwise the base of the cone doesn't an obvious $$\frac{1}{2} bh$$ formula like a triangle. This is (presumably!) why the formulas for the volumes/areas of $$n$$-spheres do not have $$\frac{1}{n!}$$ in front of them (since they have $$\frac{1}{(\frac{n}{2})!}$$ instead...).

The area of the base of a cone is $$\Omega r^2$$, but it would be nice to see that in terms of numbers we know how to actually measure. Here's a diagram:

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/cone-3.png" width="400px" %}

The quickest way to get the answer is to use the fact we mentioned a long time ago, that the surface area of a sphere is the same as its projection onto a cylinder of radius $$2 \pi r$$ and height $$2r$$. But I still don't find that very intuitive (or easy to generalize). So instead we'll do it by integrating: each differential $$ds = r d \theta$$ contributes $$dA = (2 \pi \rho) ds = 2 \pi r^2 \sin \theta d \theta$$ to the area of the cap, giving

$$
\begin{aligned}
A &= \int_0^{\theta} 2 \pi r^2 \sin \theta \d \theta \\
&= 2 \pi r^2 (1 - \cos \theta)\\
&= 2 \pi r h \\
\Omega r^2 &= 4 \pi r^2 \sin^2 \frac{\theta}{2} \\
\Omega &= 4\pi \sin^2 \frac{\theta}{2} \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Anyway, whatever this area is, it's not a $$\frac{1}{2} bh$$ formula like a tetrahedron's base.

The reason I'm talking about this at all is that I'm hoping to locate something like that might justify the $$\pi^{n/2} / (\frac{n}{2})!$$ in the $$n$$-sphere's formula. We saw that the $$1/n!$$ in the $$n$$-simplex comes from being recursively self-similar. Does the $$(n/2)!$$ come from being self-similar in some other way?

Here's an idea that didn't work: what if the above area formula _was_ that of a circle? Well.

<aside class="toggleable" id="circle" placeholder="<b>Aside</b>: More on that <em>(click to expand)</em>">

A circle's area is given in the triangle format as $$A = \frac{1}{2} bh = \frac{1}{2} (2 \pi r) (r)$$. For this to work with the area of the cone's base we would need:

$$
\begin{aligned}
A &= \Omega r^2 \\
&= \frac{1}{2} (2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{\Omega}{\pi}} r) (\sqrt{\frac{\Omega}{\pi}} r) \\
&= \frac{1}{2} (2 \pi [2 r  \sin (\frac{\theta}{2})])  [2 r \sin (\frac{\theta}{2})]
\end{aligned}
$$

Where the "radius" is given by $$x = r \sqrt{\Omega/\pi} =  2 r\sin \frac{\theta}{2}$$. Which is this:

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/cone-4.png" width="450px" %}

When $$\theta = \pi$$ this becomes $$x = 2 r$$, giving that $$4 \pi r^2 = \pi x^2$$. So the surface area of a sphere is the same as the area of a circle of radius $$2r$$, which is the base of a flat cone with base radius $$2r$$, height $$r$$, and volume $$\frac{1}{3} Bh = \frac{4}{3} \pi r^3$$. Which, okay, I could've told you that before, but it's interesting to see it emerging this way. Perhaps there's a similar relationship for $$V_4 = \frac{1}{4} V(x) r$$? Well, sadly, I don't think so: $$V_4 = \frac{1}{2} \pi^2 r^4$$, with surface $$3$$-volume $$2 \pi^2 r^3$$, which is the volume of a sphere with radius $$\sqrt[3]{3\pi/2} r$$... dang. It doesn't really work.

On the other hand, we do know a recurrence it does obey: $$V_4 = \frac{1}{4} r S_3 = \frac{1}{4} 2 \pi r^2 V_2$$. I've seen this written elsewhere as $$V_n = \frac{r}{n} S_1 V_{n-2}$$, or alternatively $$S_{n-1} = 2\pi r V_{n-2} = S_1 V_{n-2}$$. But I suspect it's probably better to think of it as $$V_n = \frac{2}{n} \pi r^2 V_{n-2} = \frac{V_2 V_{n-2}}{n/2}$$. Since, after all, it's an $$(n/2)!$$ in the denominator of $$V_n$$.

</aside>


Incidentally, we've seen elsewhere (here and in the sequel article on factorials), half-integer factorials are _almost_ just integer factorials times an oscillating factor of $$\pi^{\pm 1/2}$$:

$$(\frac{n}{2})! (\frac{n-1}{2})! = \frac{n!}{2^{n}} \sqrt{\pi}$$

So in a way the half-integer factorial serves _only_ to make the $$\pi$$ factors work out. Maybe we should see how $$V_n$$ and $$S_{n-1}$$ look with explicit factors of $$\frac{1}{n!}$$ in front:

$$
\begin{aligned}
V_n(r) &= \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{(\frac{n}{2})!} r^n \\ 
&=  \frac{r^{n}}{n!} \times \big[ 2^n \pi^{(n-1)/2}(\frac{n-1}{2})!\big]  \\
S_{n-1}(r) &= \frac{2 \pi^{n/2}}{(\frac{n}{2}-1)!} r^n \\ 
&= \frac{r^{n-1}}{(n-1)!}\times \big[ 2^{n} \pi^{(n-1)/2}(\frac{n-1}{2})! \big] 
\end{aligned}
$$

I almost prefer that. Even though the big bracketed term is awkward, at least the overall shape of the expression makes some sense. In fact, if you think of the $$2^n$$ as accounting for how a sphere can be subdivided into $$2^3 = 8$$ equal octants, then the formula really says: the area of an octant is 

$$\frac{S_{n-1}}{2^n} = \frac{ \pi^{(n-1)/2}(\frac{n-1}{2})!} {(n-1)!}$$

Which is, at least, the area of a spherical $$(n-1)$$-triangle, with a formula that looks kinda like the formula for $$(n-1)$$-triangles. Suppose we write $$T_{n-1} = S^{n-1}/2^n$$ for one of these triangles (e.g. $$T_2$$ is one eighth of a sphere's surface, a spherical triangle with three angles of $$\pi/2$$)

{% include image.html filename="2025-04-29-n-spheres/sphere-3.png" width="350px" %}

Then the $$V = \frac{1}{n} A h$$-type formula is

$$
\begin{aligned}
T_{n} &= \frac{ \pi^{n/2}(\frac{n}{2})!} {n!} \\
&= \frac{1}{n}  T_{n-1} \times [ \sqrt{\pi} \frac{(\frac{n}{2})!}{(\frac{n-1}{2})!} ] 
\end{aligned}
$$

(where of course that factor is never actually a half-integer power of $$\pi$$, because every other factorial term is $$\pi^{\pm 1/2}$$.) I don't know what it means, but at least it looks like something vaguely geometric. But I don't know what else to do with it.

------

# 5. Half-dimensional Tetrahedrons?

One other interesting triangle-like relationship: 

The volume of an even-dimensional sphere may be written in terms of $$k = n/2$$ as

$$V_{2k} = \frac{\pi^k}{k!} r^{2k}$$

Which we may rewrite as

$$V_{2k}(r) = \frac{(\pi r^2)^k}{k!}$$

This is another interpretation of why $$V_n = V_2 V_{n-2}/(n/2)$$ holds, by the way. It's a derivative with respect to $$k$$:

$$\p_k V_{2k}(r) = \frac{(\pi r^2)^{k-1}}{(k-1)!} = V_{2(k-1)}(r)$$

If we think about this as being in units of $$s = \pi r^2$$:

$$V_{2k}(s) = \frac{s^k}{k!}$$

Which is curious! The even-dimensional spheres look like repeated integrations $$V_{2k}(s) = \int_0^{s} \int_0^{s} \ldots d^k s$$. They're not exactly _products_ of circles (those are the toruses---the spheres are, I guess, $$1/k!$$ fractions of them?), but they're the _polynomials_ of circles, whatever that means. And as such their volume formulas look like those of simplexes: it is the volume of a right-angled $$k$$-simplex whose side lengths are each $$\pi r^2$$.

I don't know what to make of that. Is there some perspective in which even-dimensional spheres are $$k$$-simplexes whose sides are circles? And odd-dimensional spheres are half-integer-dimensional simplexes? Do you get the odd-dimensional spheres by taking half-derivatives? Yikes.

---------

# 6. Ending


The point of all this was to try to make some sense for myself of the fact that $$\sqrt{\pi}$$s are doing weird things in the formulas for $$N$$-spheres. I don't think I really got to the bottom of it, but along the way I do think I settled some confusions about factorials for myself.

I've left all my notes here in case anyone (or me in the future) can see some connection that I'm missing. I really want to see some "natural" way for those formulas to show up: some geometric construction that has these properties:

1. It clearly produces $$N$$ spheres from $$N-1$$ spheres
2. It clearly involves a factor of $$\sqrt{\pi}$$
3. And it's clear where the oscillating factor of $$\sqrt{\pi}$$ that cancels that one out is coming from.

I didn't quite find that, but I guess that's okay. I learned and wrote out a lot of other stuff on the way.

<!-- 

(Stray thought that I didn't get to: consider how $$4 \pi r^2 = (2\pi r)(2r)$$, the outside of a cylinder of the same circumference and height as the sphere. Going from the sphere to that cylinder involves deforming _one_ of its principal curvatures (which are both $$1/r$$) to be flat, so changing the principal curvatures from $$(\frac{1}{r}, \frac{1}{r})$$ to $$(\frac{1}{r}, 0)$$. 

So maybe the argument I'm looking for is something like: you can change one curvature without affecting area, but changing two deforms it by a factor of $$\pi$$, hence why each odd-numbered $$S_N$$ jumps up by a factor proportional to $$\pi$$? If so I would expect that in higher dimensions the other curvatures (of which there are $$N$$ total) would exhibit similar phenomenon, and maybe the [mixed volumes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mixed_volume) of the $$N$$-spheres would have the same behavior. But, not sure, and I don't have the knowledge loaded to investigate that right now.)

-->